To what extent is the use of violence by Boko Haram and Hezbollah in their respective states legitimate?
The rise of Islamist groups like Boko Haram and Hezbollah which command military like structures have presented a challenge to the common understanding of who has the legitimacy to use hard power. This is because most of political theory on war dictates that states are the sole entities that are supposed to have a monopoly over the use of hard power (Weber, 2015). Despite these groups being located in two entirely different contexts, they have both used violence to challenge state authority and fight against aggression which has allowed for them to forcefully mark their presence in the areas under their control.This essay aims to evaluate the legitimacy of the factors that led to these Islamists switching from quietesism or moderatism to extreme activism in the form of violence. To do so, I will make use of Just War Theory’s three criteria for jus ad bellum (the right to go to war), namely: Just Cause, Proportionate response and Legitimate authority, in tandem with the many ideologies these Islamists manipulate Islam in order to evaluate their legitimacy in using violence. By following this structure, I aim to come to a conclusion which shows that Hezbollah has more legitimacy in their use of violence as opposed to Boko Haram due to the former fitting more within the criteria of fighting a Just War as opposed to the latter. The reason for this stems from the fact that these Islamists do not operate within a vacuum but rather operate under the modern political systems of a nation state. Thus, in order to gain a holistic view of the legitimacy of their actions, it serves best to use the theories of International Relations and political Islam so as to arise to an answer that best justifies Hezbollah’s use of violence as opposed to Boko Haram’s. It also helps in framing these Islamists within the differing contexts of the nation states that they find themselves within, namely: Nigeria(for Boko Haram) and Lebanon(for Hezbollah).

Hezbollah’s use of violence proves to be more legitimate than Boko Haram’s as they have a more just cause. Just cause in this case defines aims or a set of goals for the use of hard power where the party warred against has acted in a capacity in which violence is the appropriate response (Toner, 2010). For the sake of this essay, violence will be defined as any action meant to cause harm towards another party; thus in this case violence can be applied both directly and indirectly. Both Boko Haram and Hezbollah arose out of a response to the direct and indirect forms of violence Muslims had been subjected to by their respective states. Hezbollah arose not only as a response to the invasion of Lebanon by Israel, but also as a platform for Shia Muslims who had been subjected to indirect violence through exclusion from the economic prosperity of the state (Moussawi, 2010). Similarly, in Nigeria, we see the same form of economic divide between the mostly Christian South and majority Sunni North (Kassim, 2015). However, by examining the causes in this shift to violent activism of the individuals that ended up forming these respective groups, we discover that Hezbollah was formed as a response to the act of aggression by Israel. On the other hand, Boko Haram arose to combat and replaced the Nigerian government, which they considered kafir, so as to establish a Caliphate (Kassim, 2015). It is from juxtaposing these factors that we identify that Hezbollah was born to prevent the Shia identity in Lebanon from being destroyed by the Israeli invasion of South Lebanon whilst Boko Haram was formed to reclaim territory and institute Sharia law so as to recreate their romanticised “Golden Era” of the caliphate. This presents the major distinction between the two: Hezbollah accepted and now operates within the political systems established with the nation state paradigm, whilst Boko Haram rejected the reality they found themselves in in favor of a romanticised era. It is this exact distinction that has led to Hezbollah shaping itself into a major political party within the political sphere of Lebanon thus acting as a platform for the disenfranchised Shia. Boko Haram, however, has evolved into a radical Islamist group that practices Jihadi-Salafism which justifies their killing of other Muslims who they consider as kafir (Kassim, 2015).Thus, it is clear the Hezbollah’s use of violence is towards a more just cause as opposed to Boko Haram’s.

By looking at the intensity of direct violence directed onto these groups, we observe that Hezbollah had a more proportional response towards their aggressors as opposed to Boko Haram. This essay will treat both accounts of proportional response within jus ad bellum and jus in bello (behaviour within war) as one in the same. Thus, proportional response will be defined as the reciprocation of hard power onto enemies whereby the benefits of engaging in conflict outweigh its negatives (Toner, 2010). In the case of Hezbollah, we observe that due to South Lebanon’s proximity to Israel, the Shi’ite community were the ones to bear the grunt of Israel’s aggression and eventual invasion in 1982 (Moussawi, 2010). From this, we observe that there was a need for the Shi’ite community to switch from quietist to activist so as to prevent their extermination at the hands of the far enemy: Israel. This switch to activism through violence came in the form of Hezbollah which allowed for the Shia to reciprocate the violence that they had been subjected to at the hands of their aggressors. As this Non State Actor found itself fighting against a state which carried out military operations specifically aimed at eradicating it e.g Operation Accountability(1993) and Operation Grapes of Wrath(1996), we observe that Hezbollah satisfied the conditions for a  proportional response by choosing to engage Israeli targets within Lebanon and Israel as they were engaged in formal warfare. Boko Haram, was on the receiving end of direct violence sanctioned through the Nigerian state through the use of the police force and military that brutalised the members of the then moderate Islamist group. Their switch to Jihadi-Salafism came after the state sanctioned execution of their leader Muhammad Yusuf who had taken up Sayyid Qutb’s philosophy and called for his followers to fight against what he saw as an illegitimate government(Kassim, 2015). Following his death, Boko Haram engaged in guerilla conflict with the Nigerian government in the name of defending the Muslim population from a kafir government(Kassin, 2015). But by engaging in a massive guerilla war in Northern Nigeria, many of the Muslims that Boko Haram were supposed to be fighting for were the victims of most of their attacks, as opposed to the actual spheres of power in South Nigeria. From this, we observe that Boko Haram’s use of violence created more negatives and human suffering to the people they claimed to be serving as much of the fighting happened within the North and not the South of Nigeria. Through juxtaposing these two cases, we see that Hezbollah had a much more proportional response in deciding to use violence.

	With regards our final criteria for jus ad bellum, Hezbollah commands more legitimate authority to use violence as opposed to Boko Haram. Hezbollah was formed to respond to the Israeli aggression and eventual invasion in 1982. Due to limited presence of the state within the South of Lebanon, different cells of rebel groups clustered into the organisation  known as Hezbollah so as to defend and fight against the invasion of their land (Moussawi, 2010). By doing so, they also slowed down the advance of the Israeli’s towards Beirut: the capital of Lebanon. Thus, through using violence to combat Israeli aggression and invasion, Hezbollah proved to act as a legitimate line of defence for the state of Lebanon. This essay acknowledges the fact that Hezbollah’s loyalties are split between both Iran and Lebanon due to their belief in wilayat al-faqih: a pledge of allegiance to Iran (Moussawi, 2010). In spite of this, the involvement of Hezbollah within state affairs like defence and parliamentary elections legitimizes their use of violence as they represent the interests of both the state and the people living in South Lebanon with regards to acting as a line of defence against Israel. Boko Haram however lacks a claim to being a legitimate authority due to them having little to no support from the Muslims they claim to be fighting for in Northern Nigeria. This is largely because of their use of violent tactics like suicide bombings of markets and mosques plus kidnapping which only occur in the Northern part of Nigeria (Kassin, 2015). Thus the targets of their intended violence happen to be the Muslims from who they are supposed to draw their legitimacy from.By declaring its fealty to The Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), Boko Haram further emphasised their intention to establish an Islamic State within their territory (Kassim, 2015). In doing so, Boko Haram signaled its complete rejection of the current political system unlike Hezbollah whose belief in wilayat al-faqih did not lead them to abandon or disassociate from the state. Rather, Hezbollah continues to operate within Lebanon’s political systems in the form of ministries and parliaments so as to ensure the Shia that they represent are engaged within politics (Moussawi, 2010). As opposed to Boko Haram whose complete rejection of the current political reality has further plunged the Muslims that they supposedly fight for into greater insecurity.

	Therefore, it is with certainty that I can conclude that Hezbollah is to a large extent legitimate with regards to their use of violence as compared to Boko Haram. Through juxtaposing these groups differing justifications for using violence with the criteria for jus ad bellum, it was observed that Hezbollah’s use of violence aligned more with : just cause, Proportionate response and legitimate authority. The use of violence by Boko Haram, however is illegitimate as it fails to meet these three criteria. As they are unable to meet this criteria, their major attempts to grab at legitimacy stem from them their belief in Jihadi-Salafism which allows for them to reject the authority of the state by identifying them as kafir. Despite recognizing Hezbollah’s use of violence as legitimate, this paper identified the issue of the parties divided loyalties between Iran and Lebanon. This divided loyalty casts shadow onto the legitimacy of their authority and use of violence as it puts them in a situation comparable to that of Boko Haram who fly under the flag of ISIL now. Regardless of this fact however, as things stand, Hezbollah retains legitimacy in their use of violence as opposed to Boko Haram due to them having  more just cause, more legitimate authority to use violence and a proportional response to their aggressors.
